Filamenting Notes

A bit of a ramble concerning some of the problems I encountered while
reimplementing the core biophysics of CellModeller:

This module is an attempt to add support for variable cell morphologies within
the energy-minimization perspective of the original CellModeller application.
Alternative approaches tend to use coupled spring-based ODE models, which are
supposed to take longer to solve than least squares regression, but after
completing my introductory course in computational differential equations I'm
starting to think that is a better approach to this problem. I'm not even sure
the original code actually used matrix multiplications in the implementation,
and it was just a way of framing the problem... There has also been a lot of
work done in GPU accelerated solving of differential equations massively in
parallel. Ex:
SciML Julia implementation: https://github.com/SciML/DiffEqGPU.jl
Raymond J. Spiteri (USask): https://www.cs.usask.ca/~spiteri/M314/notes/parallelODEs.pdf

With regards to the existing modelling approach, however, some considerations:
First, make sure the you understand the contents of math.pdf, and are able to
identify the steps as the occur in BacillusModel. Of note is the assumption
that "viscous drag dominates inertia", which I missed for a long time and that
made a lot of the math very confusing. However, in the course of checking all
the equations for dimensional consistency I realized we need a better physical
interpretation of the model parameters. There are 3 key parameters the matrix
equations rely on: muA, gamma, and alpha. The documentation describes gamma as
"resistance to change in length" and alpha as "relative energy cost ... due to
deformation of cell wall", but I couldn't find dimensions for either.

Because I didn't understand the use of momentum, I attempted to re-derive the
equations based around change in position instead. It is unclear to me whether
or not the original implementation in CLBacterium.cl finds position or momentum.

We are dealing with an energy-minimization problem and alpha is multiplied by
change in position^2 before being added to the work term, I figured it would
make sense to have it be [M]/[T]^2 like a spring constant. On the other hand, it
is mentioned that "growth velocity" is in [L]/[T], although I ended up rewriting
it in [T]^-1 to better match the assumption of length-dependent growth rate.
However, I couldn't find a way of defining internal growth pressure in terms of
cell variables - it was always so weak that even two cells lined up end to end
would just stop each other from growing entirely instead of pushing apart. gamma
is a global parameter quantity in [M]/[T] and doesn't seem related to any sort
of pressure, but it seems to be the only way of reasonably limiting cell growth.
So it remains a question to me: what is a possible physical interpretation of
this parameter that we could measure in experiment?

When considering possible candidates I came up with cell elasticity and membrane
surface tension. Neither of these options make sense in this context because
they aren't driving cell growth. The alternative is that the cytoskeleton is
responsible for "growth pressure". This is somewhat of a relief because the
other options seem to invalidate our current model of filamenting cells and
while segments might not be ideal it at least somewhat aligns with the idea of
multinuclear filaments. This does make it harder to characterize though and I
wonder if gamma can vary per cell, despite muA and alpha being global params.

Testing different values for muA, gamma, and alpha reveals qualitatively
different behaviour so it is definitely important to consider the effect of
these parameters on experimental outcomes.

Good luck to whoever takes up this project next!
